# **CS499 ePortfolio**
______________________________________________________________________________________

## **Introduction**

My name is Andrew Krumbach and I have been attending SNHU since January of 2024. This page serves as my final project and ePortfolio for CS-499 Capstone and effectively ends my time here at SNHU where I will be graduating with a Bacelor's degree in Computer Science.

______________________________________________________________________________________

## **Professional Self-Assessment**

Throughout my computer science program, I have gained the knowledge, confidence, and skills necessary to grow as a software and game developer. The completion of my capstone ePortfolio has allowed me to bring all these skills together in a very polished and professional way.  Completing the work necessary for the course and building my portfolio has helped me showcase my strengths, shape what my plans are for my career, and understand what I want to be able to bring into the field.  Throughout the program, I have learned many useful things such as how to design software systems using different languages, how to write clean and maintainable code, how to properly integrate databases, apply secure practices through development, and think critically about the role technology plays in society today. More importantly, the capstone project challenged me to take a project I created early in my career to a fully updated application that demonstrates not only technical experience, but also adaptability and problem-solving skills.

The work I did throughout my career at SNHU gave me experience in many important areas of computer science that I continually applied through each class. I learned to collaborate effectively on projects and assignments through group work, specifically in an agile based environment which taught me the skills necessary to effectively work as a team on any project I am included on in the future. In these projects, I was able to practice communication, organization, and version control in a simulated environment. Another skill I learned throughout my course was how to effectively communicate with stakeholders in terms they would understand while also writing design documents and user stories so that we could effectively create a product the stakeholders would be proud of.  Courses based in data structures and algorithms helped me analyze problems, select appropriate structures to get the problem completed such as hash maps and graphs, and design algorithmic solutions that are efficient in solving specific problems. Course based in software engineering helped me to grasp modular design of a project, strategies for testing code, and full-stack development for applications.  Classes focused on databases allowed me to work with SQL, design schemas, query databases, and ensure data integrity. Finally, courses I took that focused on security taught me how to identify vulnerabilities in my code, validation of input, how to apply secure coding methods, and consider risks throughout the lifecycle of development.  All of these experiences have helped to shape me into the developer I am today and gave me the skills I needed to complete my capstone and contribute to any team I am contributing to in my professional future.

My capstone project itself reflects what I have learned. I took a single file text adventure game I created in one of my first coding classes and I turned it into a professional, object-oriented Java application that includes classes that are highly structured, modular, and include significantly improved logic. I enhanced the project through multiple strategic updates. First, I restructured the system using stronger algorithms and data structures, I then expanded the architecture of the app to improve my user’s experience, and finally, I integrated a SQLite database using JDBC to include a secure login with a hashed password and save-state functionality. Each of these enhancements show a different level of my understanding of the computer science necessities including problem-solving, design, integration of databases, security, and adaptability. This artifact works together to show my full range of skills that illustrates how I can build scalable applications, implement layers of persistence, apply principles in security, and show my design decisions.

Overall, my portfolio shows everything I have learned over the course of my education and creates the foundation of my future in the field of computer science. It shows how I approach a challenge, how I evolve a project through enhancements that add onto themselves, and how I use my knowledge to apply industry standard techniques to create high-quality solutions and designs.  By presenting my work through this artifact that I follow with documentation and reflection, my ePortfolio shows what I have learned as well as how I will continue to grow and contribute as a professional in the development space.

______________________________________________________________________________________

## **Code Review**
[Code Review Youtube Link](https://youtu.be/mBVc4JruSi8)

______________________________________________________________________________________

## **Enhancement One - Software Design and Development**

The artifact that I have selected for the first enhancement is my basic text-adventure game Bletheria. This project was originally created using Python as a single procedural script during one of my first courses here at SNHU. The original version included the full game loop, item collection, a branching storyline depending on the items you have, and a final boss encounter all inside one large file.  Although the game was functional and fun to play, the way it was structured was flat and very difficult to maintain and update. It relied heavily on global variable and large conditional blocks, which ultimately limited scalability and essentially made future expansion exceptionally more challenging to execute.

I selected this artifact because it will allow me to demonstrate my ability to design, build, and enhance a complete software system from the ground up. Bletheria directly showcases my creativity, ability to problem-solve, and foundational programming skills, but most importantly, the enhancements I added for this project show my growth through the program as a capable software engineer. This artifact showcases my ability to create clean and successful object-oriented programming through the creation of classes. It also shows my ability to create clean software architecture using principles like encapsulation and modularity. Finally, this enhancement shows that the code can be extended and maintained through the code which has been structured to support any future enhancements or additions for later enhancements in this course alone. For this enhancement, the artifact was improved significantly by refactoring the entire game from a Python file to an object-oriented class-based Java file.  As stated above, it has been organized into multiple classes that communicate through well-defined methods. This makes the code significantly easier to update, test, and expand which is exactly the type of engineering expected in professional environments.

This enhancement directly meets the course outcomes I had targeted in Module one. My goal for this portion of the capstone was to satisfy Outcome 3: Design and evaluate computing solutions using algorithmic principles and professional standards while managing trade-offs involved in design choices. I was able to satisfy this by redesigning the architecture of the game using object-oriented design principles, separating different outcomes between classes, and improving the maintainability. I also partially satisfied Outcome 4: Demonstrate the ability to use well-founded and innovative techniques, skills, and tools in computing practices. I did this by porting the program into Java, using modern language features, and preparing the system for future expansions. I also demonstrated the use of industry standards when it comes to design. I do not believe I need to update my plan as this enhancement aligned with what I intended to do for Outcome 3 and sets the foundation for 4 and 5 in future enhancements.

While enhancing this artifact, I have learned a lot about designing software that is both flexible and scalable. Converting my initial Python project into a robust object-oriented Java project required some deep thought on my end when it came to class responsibilities, data encapsulation, and how my objects interacted. In doing this, my understanding of object-oriented design increased significantly beyond basic syntax.
One of the biggest challenges I faced in this enhancement came when I was restructuring the logic I had initially all in one large loop. I had to unwind some of it to make it work in a class-based design. I needed to really think about where certain behaviors belonged like traveling between rooms, item management, and the ending logic. This forced me to think like a software engineer rather than just a programmer.  Another challenge I faced was making sure the new Java version behaved exactly like the original Python game while also following better design principles. 

I believe overall this enhancement strengthened my ability to analyze code that I have already created, plan a complete refactoring, and deliver a cleaner and more professional version of my game. It showcased the importance of organization within code and set a solid foundation for my next enhancements that involve pathfinding, databases, and secure user authentication.

[Link to Original Artifact](https://github.com/krum4643/CS499/blob/main/Bletheria.py)

[Link to Enhancement One](https://github.com/krum4643/CS499/tree/main/Enhancement%201/Bletheria)

______________________________________________________________________________________

## **Enhancement Two: Algorithms and Data Structures**

For enhancement 2 I selected the same artifact as enhancement 1, which is my text-adventure game that I developed in my Intro to Scripting class. At this point I have ported the original game over to Java and successfully created an object-oriented class-based game that is more easily scalable and maintainable. Enhancement 2 directly builds from enhancement 1 which was the port. I chose this artifact because I can take my super basic single file procedural Pythion code that was one of the first working programs I have built in this degree and completely overhaul it making it more manageable, maintainable, and able to handle algorithms that I add in. In enhancement 2, I improved the Java version by adding new features that required me to think structurally. These enhancements include a room directory, a hint system that uses logic to guide the player in the correct direction, and cleaner data that is handled across the game’s multiple components. These improvements highlight my ability to work with HashMaps, lists, and routing logic to create organized and efficient systems.

In completing this enhancement, I have successfully met the outcomes I targeted in Module One that relates to designing and evaluating computing solutions using appropriate data structures and algorithmic principles. By expanding the way the rooms are internally mapped with exits and commands as well as implementing the new hint algorithm, I was able to make the game stronger and more complex. So far, my outcome coverage plan hasn’t changed and with this enhancement I have positioned myself well to address database and security outcomes in my later work.
  
Reflecting on the process, I learned the importance of modular design and clear relationships between data in order to be able to scale the game in the future. Moving from a procedural layout to the more flexible object-oriented system required me to think about my end goals and how each class would communicate to share data and make it flow easily.  One of the biggest challenges this enhancement gave me was making sure the hint system worked correctly and was useable and had no broken paths. I had to rework it a few times to make sure that players knew which rooms were available and then once the hint was given the system would include directions to get to that outcome which I really needed to work out in my head how to accomplish. Addressing these issues and getting to a point where my code worked felt amazing. I was able to prove to myself that I am able to properly debug, design, and problem-solve my code when it gave me logic errors or broken paths. Overall, this enhancement significantly improved the artifact’s structure, usability, and readiness for expansion in the future.

[Link to Original Artifact](https://github.com/krum4643/CS499/blob/main/Bletheria.py)

[Link to Enhancement Two](https://github.com/krum4643/CS499/tree/main/Enhancement%202/Bletheria)

______________________________________________________________________________________

## **Enhancement Three: Database**

For my third and final enhancement, the artifact I selected was the same as the other two, my text-based adventure game that was created using Python in an earlier course that I am expanding and refining as a Java project. In this enhancement, I integrated a SQLite database using JDBC to add a user authentication system and a way for users to save their game in the current state. This allows players to create an account with a username and password and then later return to the game to continue where they left off. The system stores player information and game progress including the room location and state, and it retrieves this info when a user logs in with their own credentials.  I decided to include this artifact because of the original simplicity of it. I knew I could take the base code and add multiple layers to it to meet industry standards and elevate the game itself. This artifact helped me to demonstrate my ability to build a large, multi-layered system that interacts smoothly between the logic of the application and storage of user data. 

This enhancement directly fulfills Course Outcome 4: Demonstrate an ability to use well-founded and innovative techniques, skills, and tools in computing practices for the purpose of implementing computer solutions that deliver value and accomplish industry-specific goals (software engineering/design/database). It also satisfies Course Outcome 5: Develop a security mindset that anticipates adversarial exploits in software architecture and designs to expose potential vulnerabilities, mitigate design flaws, and ensure privacy and enhanced security of data and resources. By creating a login that utilizes the database and a save-state system as well as adding input validation and safe query handling, I not only strengthened the functionality of my artifact, but I also buffed the security as well for any of my users. This enhancement completed the remaining outcomes I had yet to satisfy in my coverage plan that I developed in Module One. Because these are all satisfied, I have no need to update my plan or make any adjustments.

During the creation of this enhancement, I taught myself how important environment configuration truly is when you are working with external tech.  One of the main challenges I faced was that my DatabaseManager class kept throwing connection errors and I couldn’t figure out why. I eventually discovered that I had completely forgotten to download the SQLite JDBC driver and needed to add that in manually as an external JAR. Once I added that in, the database features began to function the way I had designed them to. I also found challenge in ensuring the secure handling of user input, validating login credentials, and structurally integrating the save system with what I had already built.  As I was able to get everything online and functioning, I had strengthened my skills with databases, coding securely, and layering in software design architecture throughout my capstone. All of this greatly improved the quality, reliability, and overall professionalism of my final capstone artifact.

[Link to Original Artifact](https://github.com/krum4643/CS499/blob/main/Bletheria.py)

[Link to Enhancement Three](https://github.com/krum4643/CS499/tree/main/Enhancement%203/Bletheria)



